>>I'm going to show you
an ancient Chinese method
of divination.
Perhaps, you know that
divination is really
a kind of fortune telling.
But this particular
kind of divination
is based on what
some people believe
to be the very oldest of all
the Chinese classics, "The Book
of Changes."
I say divination is something
like fortune telling,
but it's a little bit more
highbrow than ordinary fortune
telling.
One wouldn't, I think,
presume to ask so hoary a book
of wisdom as the "I Ching" what
to bet on the stock market.
Rather, one asks
questions about one's
spiritual, psychological
state or very great
momentous decisions of life.
The very old and unorthodox
way of consulting
"The Book of Changes" is to use
the stalks of the yarrow plant.
A number of stalks are
taken and divided at random,
and so calculations are made.
This is a rather long and
elaborate way of doing it.
And a not so ancient,
but equally respectable
way, is to use Chinese coins.
You know, the kind of coins that
have a hole through the middle,
so that you can carry them
on a string around your neck.
So if I would ask
"The Book of Changes"
what is the best thing for
me in my present state,
that is the sort
of question that
would be appropriate under
circumstances like this.
So we take the coins,
and we shake them.
And drop them.
And according to the way
they fall, heads or tails,
we get a positive or
a negative reading.
In this particular case,
we get a negative leading.
The symbol which records
the negative reading,
being the drawing
of a broken line.
That line is called a
Yin, or negative line.
We do it again.
And this time, the
reading is again negative.
And we record it.
We shake them again.
And this time the
reading is positive.
And we record that by an
unbroken line or a yang line,
Y-A-N-G, representing
the positive principle.
Again, and once more
the line is negative.
Again, and the line
is once more negative.
And then a final sixth time,
and the line is positive.
And so we get this figure.
And in order to
know what it means,
we have to take a look at a
very, very ancient diagram,
which may be familiar to you.
Perhaps, you've seen this
diagram on Chinese bowls
or jewelry sometimes,
or carving in jade.
This is called the bagua
or the eight trigrams.
In the center of the
design, you see this figure,
which maybe familiar
to some of you
as the trademark of the
Northern Pacific Railroad.
But actually, it's
meaning in China
is the symbol all of these
two fundamental principles,
the negative and the positive,
the yang and the yin,
which are held to
lie at the root
of all phenomena in the world.
The ward yang,
which is represented
by this comma or
fish that is white,
means the south or bright
side of a mountain.
And then yin, Y-I-N
we Romanized that,
means the shady or dark
side of a mountain.
And thus respectively,
they're called
the male and the
female principles.
Now, you'll
obviously notice that
with the symbolism of the light
and dark side of a mountain
that you can't have a
mountain with only one side.
The two sides must
always go together.
And so in the same
way, the Chinese
feel that the positive
and the negative,
the light and the dark,
the male and the female,
the auspicious and
inauspicious, always
go together in human life.
Because one cannot be
distinguished without
the other.
In the second
chapter of his book,
the old philosopher Laozi, whom
I have mentioned many times
in these programs, says when
all the world recognizes beauty
to be beautiful, there
is already ugliness.
When all the world
recognizes good to be good,
there is already evil.
Thus, to be and not
to be arise mutually.
And you can say that to
be is the principal yang,
and not to be the principal
yin, respectively,
the positive and the negative.
And now, outside
the rotating figure
of the positive and
negative principles,
you will find these
eight trigrams,
trigrams meaning
symbols of three lines.
And here, you will see the
broken and unbroken lines,
such as I drew when I was
consulting the oracle.
The broken being
the yin lines and
the unbroken, yang
or positive lines.
And these trigrams represent
the eight fundamental principles
or elements which, according
to this "Book of Changes,"
are involved in
every life situation.
For example, the one at the
top means heaven or sky.
The one below means Earth.
This is the father.
This is the mother.
Over the side, for example,
this one means fire.
And over here, that
one, means water.
And as you will see, we
derived two of these trigrams.
The point of the oracle being
that every situation in life
is a combination of two of these
principles in preponderance.
And the ones that we have here
is this one repeated twice.
And this one has the
meaning of a mountain,
a mountain over a mountain.
Now, there are 64
possible combinations
of these eight
trigrams, which makes
the meaning of each combination
pretty difficult to remember.
So we'd better go and look
at "The Book of Changes"
itself, and see what it has to
say about this particular one,
what advice the oracle
would want to give me
in answer to my question
about my present situation.
The mountain over the mountain
happens to be-- let's see,
that's number 52.
The figure of the mountain,
of course, has a symbolism.
And it means the idea of
quietness or keeping still.
And so when we
have keeping still,
quietness above quietness,
we get a whole emblem
whose meaning is profound calm.
And so the oracle
says, keeping still.
Keeping his back still so that
he no longer feels his body.
He goes into his courtyard,
and does not see his people.
No blame.
Mountains standing
close together,
the image of keeping still,
thus the superior man
does not permit his thoughts
to go beyond his situation.
The heart thinks constantly.
This cannot be changed.
But the movements of the heart,
that is a man's thoughts,
should restrict themselves
to the immediate situation.
All thinking that goes beyond
this only makes the heart sore.
Now, you can see that that's
pretty generalized advice.
And it's appropriate, in
a way, to the question.
Because the question was
vague, and the answer is vague.
But the symbolism of
this answer is simply
that sitting so as to
keep one's back still,
so that one's back is not
noticed, is self-forgetfulness.
And keeping one's thoughts
to the immediate situation
means the practice of meditation
or calmness or quietness.
And that's what
I'm advised to do.
It's good advice.
Now you may say, well, this
is a thoroughly crazy way
of coming at
decisions, especially
if I were to ask something
more specific than this.
If I had asked advice
on some momentous
decision I had to made,
we would naturally
say from our modern
scientific point of view
that flipping coins to come
to the great decisions of life
is the stupidest thing
we could possibly do.
After all, it neglects
for rational cogitation
about our situations.
We would say, well,
it takes no account
of the data in the situation.
It makes no
intelligent assessment
of the probabilities.
And before we make any
important decision,
we think over all
the factors involved.
We balance the pros
against the cons.
We balance assets against
deficit, and so on.
We go into the situation
and think it out thoroughly.
And therefore, what could be
more superstitious than relying
upon some oracle
that has entirely
to do with the purely chance
falling of the coins that
have no relation to
the problem whatsoever?
That's our contemporary
point of view
about all methods of
fortune telling divination,
so on and so forth.
But now look.
Someone who believed
in this system,
an old fashioned Chinese,
might say to us, but listen.
First of all, when you estimate
the data, when you consider
the facts that are involved
in any particular decision,
how do you know exactly
what facts are involved?
After all, you're going
to sign a contract.
And the facts you
think about that
are relevant to this
contract are the state
of your own business, the state
of the other fellow's business,
the prospects, the market,
and so on and so forth.
But something that you may
never have considered at all
may enter into the situation
and change it utterly.
The man with whom you're
going to make the contract
may slip on a banana
skin, and so hurt his head
and become inefficient
in business.
How would anyone ever think
of such an eventuality
in taking a sane and rational
view of the situation?
Or he might say
to us, how do you
know when you've
got in enough data?
After all, the data,
the causes, the problems
involved in any
particular situation
are virtually infinite.
And as a matter fact,
you stop getting
in data, stop
getting information
as to how to solve a problem,
either when you're tired of it
or when the time comes
to act and you haven't
time to collect any more data.
And he would say,
that is just as
irrational as flipping coins.
Because you decide when
to stop investigating
in a very arbitrary way.
So are you really very
much more ahead of us?
Well, we could say, what
about probabilities?
After all, we rely a
great deal on statistics
in order to make decisions.
And he would say, again
about statistics, yes.
Statistics are
all very well when
you want to know what a lot
of people are going to do.
For example, if you
flip a coin, you
know that if you flip
a coin 100 times,
there is going to be
quite a probability
that you will toss half of the
time heads, half of the time
tails.
1,000 tosses, and
you will get nearer
to an exact half and half.
But each individual
toss, the chance
is 50-50 whether it
will be heads or tails.
In other words, you may
have tossed 999 times.
And you may have had
400 tails tosses.
You may have had the
rest heads tosses.
So the probability will
be on the thousands
that it will go to
tails, because that's
had the lesser number of tosses.
About actually, your chance
on it coming up heads or tails
at that particular
moment is, again, 50-50.
And the probability
really tells you nothing.
And so in the same way with the
actuarial tables of insurance
companies, they will
say the average lifespan
of an adult male is 65 years.
But on any individual
case, these tables
do not tell us when
I am going to die.
And so our Chinese
critic might say, well?
So you see, I myself am of a
somewhat skeptical temperament.
And I very much doubt
in fact whether this way
of coming at decisions
really worked.
Or let us put it this way.
We can never really
prove whether any method
of coming to decisions
really works.
I mean, I may make
a foolish decision.
And I call it foolish,
because as a result of it,
I get killed.
But there's absolutely
no way of showing
that my getting
killed at that moment
didn't preserve me
from a worse fate,
from making mistakes
that involved
the lives of many other people.
If I so-called succeed by
making the right decision
and I earn a! $1
million, there's
no way of showing that this
isn't so bad for my character
that it's the worst thing
that could possibly happen.
So we never really know whether
the outcome of a decision
is a failure or a success,
not in the long run.
Because only the
unknown, what comes next,
will show whether
it was good or bad.
And the unknown stretches
infinitely into the future.
But it seems to me
that the importance
of this old Chinese book
of divination is two-fold.
First of all, there's
a bad side to it,
a distinct disadvantage
in Chinese culture.
The Chinese came so much to
rely on "The Book of Changes,"
and to use its
system of symbols--
those trigrams I showed
you-- for classifying
all natural phenomena,
that in the course of time,
it became a very rigid thing.
And it excluded the
perception of novelty.
Now, the warning and the
advantage to us in that is we
can do the same thing
with scientific method.
There are certain
kinds of personality
who become very rigid in
their scientific ideas
and simply automatically
exclude certain possibilities,
because they don't conform
with alleged scientific dogma.
Take for example what we call
ESP or Extrasensory Perception.
I rather call it extraordinary
sensory perception.
But still there is
good reason to believe
that there is extremely
strong evidence for something
of this kind of occurring.
And yet, many scientific people
will ignore that evidence,
because they say things like
that simply can't happen.
And that is to fall
into the same rut
that the Chinese fell into when
they relied to meticulously
upon the classification
of the world
and of events found in
"The Books of Changes."
But there's a positive
side to the picture.
For this "Book of
Changes" is founded
on a view life, which is
very suggestive to us which
is in accord with
certain points of view
that now develop
in our own science,
a way of looking at life
which sees not so much
the causal relationship
between events
as the pattern of events.
Let me try and show
that difference.
When we think of causality, we
think chiefly of the way events
are determined by their past.
It's as if events
were a lot of marbles.
And they're thrown together, and
they knock each other around.
And therefore, in
tracing the movement
of any particular marble,
we try to find out
which other marbles knocked it.
And so trace it back,
and back, and back.
And until quite recent
times, the whole view
of Western science was based
on the idea of causality,
how things are influenced
by past things.
But the point of view that
underlies "The Book of Changes"
the Chinese never really
applied to their science.
They applied it
rather to their art
and perhaps their
philosophy of law.
But the point of view
here is different.
Instead of understanding events
by relation to past causes,
it understands
events by relation
to their present pattern.
And in other words,
it comprehends them
by taking a total
view instead of what
we might call a linear view.
If, for example, we can
find a suitable analogy
for the Western way
of looking at things,
we might say it is understanding
events in accordance
with the order of words.
For example, I can say,
"this dog has no bark,"
and then, "this
tree has no bark."
Now, the meaning of bark
in these two sentences
is determined by what
went before them.
I make sounds before
I say the sound bark.
Before I say "bark," I
say, "this dog has no."
Now, if I want to
know what bark means,
I have to go back to what
happened in the past.
But if you take the order not of
words, but what I would rather
call the order of design, we get
a rather different situation.
Supposing I draw
two small circles.
And these correspond
to the two words bark.
They're both the same.
But now, supposing
a design arises
around those two circles.
And then at once, we see
that in that context,
those two original circles
have quite different meaning.
But you see their relationship
to their meeting all at once.
I mean, imagine supposing
these designs had not
been drawn by a brush line
after line after line,
but had appeared
altogether at once as you
see the image appear
when you're developing
a photographic plate.
Then you would see
that the meaning
of each part of the design
is relative to the rest of it
as you see it now
at this moment.
And so in the same way,
the fundamental philosophy
of "The Book of Changes"
and of the Chinese idea
of the relationship
between events
is to understand every event
in its present context.
Not understanding it so much as
we do by what went before it,
but rather understanding it
in terms of what goes with it.
Thus, the idea of
"The Book of Changes"
is to reveal through its
symbols the total pattern
of the moment when the question
is asked on the supposition
that the pattern of
this moment governs
even the tossing of the coins.
Now then, the
interesting comparison
that arises out of this is
that because we in the West
have tended to understand
events in accordance
with the order of
words, in accordance
causality, we have
evolved a conception of
nature as based on law.
In other words, when we
ask for the explanation
of any natural phenomenon,
we look for that explanation
in words, in a formulation
that will describe a law.
On the other hand,
the Chinese have not
evolved the idea
of a law of nature,
but something quite different,
but equally valid and equally
useful.
There is indeed
a word in Chinese
for law in very much
our sense of law.
It's a rather interesting word.
Because as it was
originally written,
it was a picture like this.
That's a picture
of an iron cauldron
and beside it, a
figure holding a knife.
This is the Chinese
word for law,
T-S-E, "za," which most
corresponds to our idea of law.
And the reason for this symbol
is that in ancient times,
some of the old emperors
commanded the laws
to be written on the iron
sacrificial cauldrons.
And when the people came
to offer sacrifice and put
their offerings
into the cauldrons,
they could read the law
written upon the cauldrons.
But at the time when those
ancient emperors ordered
the laws to be
written in this way,
there were certain sage
and scholars who said, no.
You shouldn't write
the laws down.
Because if you
write the laws down,
the people will develop
a litigious spirit.
That is to say, they
will start quibbling.
And therefore, the property
of the order of nature
is sometimes called,
in Chinese, not this.
The expression
wu-tse-- "wu" meaning
not-- is used, meaning
apparently lawless.
But it doesn't
really mean lawless.
For example, if
we go for a moment
to Chinese ideas of
civil law, a good judge
does not base his decisions on
this kind of law, written down
law.
Because he knows that
no written law can
apply to all the complex
multiplicity of circumstances
with may arise.
And so he bases his
decisions on what
the Chinese call not
law, but justice.
This word is
pronounced "eee," "I."
And justice, in the
sense, correspondents
rather to our idea of equity.
It is the sensibility for
order and reasonableness
that is embodied
in an individual.
He hasn't got it
clearly written down.
But he is the sort
of person who is
able to judge in any
particular circumstance
whether a certain decision
is fair or not fair.
And they much rather
trust a man who
has I in him than a man who
has a thorough knowledge
of the rules.
And so we come thus
to a conception
of the order of
nature that is one
of the most important words
in the Chinese language.
And that is a word,
which originally
meant the markings in
jade, the grain in wood,
or the fiber in muscle.
And it's pronounced "lee."
This is a character
then meaning really
the basic fundamental
pattern of things.
But such an image is used
as the markings in jade
or the grain in wood, because
this is an extremely subtle
complex pattern, a huge area of
events all happening together
at once, which has to be taken
in at a glance in the same way
as we take design in at a
glance, understood at a glance,
and therefore is not
capable of formulation
in the order of words.
And so, Li, meaning,
perhaps, organic pattern,
is the fundamental Chinese
idea of the order of nature.
In other words, when
we think of beauty,
we know very clearly what
is beautiful and what isn't.
But it's absolutely
impossible to write down
a set of laws and
rules as to how
one will create
beautiful objects.
In mathematics, for example,
mathematicians often
feel that certain equations,
certain expressions,
are peculiarly beautiful.
And mathematicians, because
they are meticulous people,
try to think out exactly
why is this beautiful.
Could we make up
a rule for beauty?
And yet they come
to the conclusion
that if we could make up a rule,
and apply it in mathematics
and always by the
use of this rule
get a beautiful
result, eventually
those results would cease to
impress us as being beautiful.
They would become
sterile and dry.
And so in the same way,
the order of nature,
the order of justice, the order
of beauty are things which we
can know in ourselves, but
we cannot write down in black
and white.
And therefore, the
superior man is
one who has the sensibility
for these things in himself.